Hello everyone and welcome to this week's Stellar Developer Meeting a little bit earlier than usual. But the reason is we have some really exciting episode here we have some of the guys from open sein we are doing this as a followup from the last session we did this this time we're going to be a little bit more technical. So I would like to add the open sing guys from to our studio welcome guys please please do a quick introduction of who you are what you're doing and yeah let's get started yeah I can start yeah thanks for hosting us Carston yeah really excited to to be here my name is buan
I am open source developer at open OpenZeppelin yeah building together with osun the Stellar contracts Library yeah my background yeah it's it's mostly related in the past to to some EVM development Solidity also some R development. So yeah trying to to bring the best from from all the experiences I had great welcome thank you hello everyone it's oen my name may be hard to pronounce for some. So you can call me o. If that's easier for you. So I'm working with OP Zeppelin for about one and a half years and my background is more on the the high
performance Computing distributed systems and cryptography all of these included I started my blockchain journey in some startups for layer zero or layer one. If you will. And then transitioned more into po do ecosystem, and now I'm switched to Stell and quite happy with it great great thank you and welcome to you too yeah we started this journey a. While ago and the the reason is or the objective is to make it easier to for for new developers to to onboard Stellar and to to build great Solutions. So where are we. Now how how far have we come in implementing Stellar in in open sppin can you just give a really quick overview of where we are and what's being worked on. If you want to go you can go yeah sure yeah. So yeah it's been couple
couple months, that we we kicked it off we are already on our like approaching our second audit meaning, that we are we accomplished our second milestone and the idea is, that we we got our work audited on a regular basis. So the the the products the the tools we are delivering to Stellar ecosystem are safe and secure and yeah. So so at the moment like we last month for E Denver we we shipped our first first release, that was about fible tokens and the PO
utility. Now we are heading to delivering the non funable Implement non fible token tokens tokens implementation implementation packed with couple of extensions so, that that suits different use cases. So and yeah next week we are kicking off the the second audit, that will last for another week and. And then we are shipping the next yeah the next release okay great this is where we are great. So for for those who may not have followed the the openin initiative or have just curious what what's what what we we're doing here can you maybe share the screen just show an example of what what
the what it looks like like the maybe the wizard just really quick give an introduction to like what is it the developers are experiencing and what is it the developers can do right. Now yeah sure I can showcase the wizard The Open Zepp Wizard and how it makes super easy for developers to to have like a base basic smart contract at some custom functionalities. If they're needed and deployed to to testet yeah I would love to to do, that yeah I think, that would be a great introduction to to open sa for for new develop yeah sure. So let me share my screen
so can you look at my screen I think it's loading yeah okay. So here it is the the the Wizard. So it's `wizard.open.com` I believe it may be helpful to zoom in just one or two more bits to make it more readable okay this is this time I think good what what do you think yeah it's it's I think we can read it. Now yeah it looks looks good okay. So yeah this is our wizard, which the idea of it is like to to
make life easier. If you need to like to to build up something quickly. So some with some base some basic features you can use it yeah you can see we have for different languages and U chains chains. So here at, that's Stellar for the moment we have only fungible. But as we fin once we finish the non fungible module and get get it audited it will be added here similar to. So you can see at for Solidity there are different modules for the moment here we have only F and thanks to this UI you can configure the Bas the basic properties of your Tok for example let's
call call it awesome awesome token it's yeah really basic. So and here we can Define for example. If we want to do some Prem Min let's say we want to to Mint 1,000 of bit of this token and here there are different Fe Fe, that we can add on top of this basic implementation for example say we want it to be minable and you see how the UI gets updated. If you want to to add a burnable functionality meaning to allow users to burn their tokens they wish. So we can click on, that and yeah this is how our contract looks like. Then let's deploy it to to
test test net. So we are going to set up a project with the Stell CLI. So yeah for those who yeah yeah we can check at Stellar documentation how to to install the CLI and and use it. But yeah here we're initializing the the project. So here we have our awesome token contract yeah we we need to add the the dependency here the recommendation is to use to pin it to a specific version
or or tag. So as the this version 0. One is the the most recently audited it's this version, that we are going to use. Then we are ready to like to delete this boiler plate, that was provided by the C and go back to the wizard UI here we are copying our contract going back to the file we are pasting pasting it and yeah. So we have it we have everything set up. If we like. If we need to do some modifications we we can we and we know of course what what we are doing we can go and straight to the
to the codent modified. Then we are going to to build this contract. So it is done. Then the recommendations are to also not only build. But also to optimize it. So there is a special yeah there is a CLI command for it. So well it's not there yeah it's. So my target
so here it is we we gained like something like 1,000 and something bytes of our optimized version. So it is ready to be deployed. Now just for the record I have like I set it up wallet from the Stellar lab and funded it with some lumens test net lumens, and now we are going to deploy it. So it was called my awesome token right we are deploying it with the Alice key yeah here is U an address, that
will be the owner and the the recipient let's let's say it will be Alice again. So Alice will re receive the the the tokens so. If everything's fine we should have our contract. So yeah this is fine it gets it got deployed this at this address and Alice received the 1,000 1,000 tokens, that we we yeah we we preed basically, and now yeah you can interact with this contract either with the CLI or build
a UI build a UI for it maybe just let you let demonstrate how we can invoke invoke it. So just to. So this is the contract. So yeah it actually it is stored under token the token Alas and we going to check the balance of Alice yeah okay. So it's working we checked. So the balance is correct. Because it's yeah how
the yeah basically we preed 1,000 with 18 decimals so, that's why we see. So big zero. So so many zeros and yeah I guess this is enough this is great it really I convince you it's really easy I mean of course you have to to be familiar a bit with the Stellar CI. But I think it's a great very intuitive and user friendly. So yeah it's really easy to to get up to speed with with, that. So yeah yeah yeah I think this this demo showed really how how simple it is to to to work with and one thing, that I appreciate a lot too is the testing, that this goes through on your end so. If if you are implementing this yourself and maybe you you are
still pretty new to development on on on Stellar I think just knowing, that this has been tested thoroughly this is secure this is safe I think, that that gives me a lot more confidence as a developer, that the products I'm building, that they are also safe for for the users. So I think, that's, that's something, that you know the convenience of of using open sein is is is obvious here it's super easy and simple. But I think I think for me the knowing, that that this has actually gone through very serious testing, that that, that's something, that I would like to at least put a little bit of Spotlight on I think maybe we can see. If there's anyone, that has any questions let me see I see Elliot actually one of my team members he has a question here he says in the NFT contracts are you implementing the same extensions as the
F tokens or is a different set of extensions I believe I can take this one. So they are not completely the same since the standards We are following are getting differentiated as well. So for NFTs it would be enumerable consecutive minable burnable and also claimable. But some of these are not exactly exactly extensions. But we want to give the name of them so, that. If a person from other ecosystems comes here and wants to search for these they will know how they are implemented or adopted into Stellar. So these five things, that I mentioned will be covered okay great we have another question from JS maxi it says said
we we are sentential developing an R ERC 4626 standard Vault Solution on Stell San and. If that could be integrated into open sain standard library for soran in the future I don't actually don't know. If that's something we can answer here I think, that's probably is about 46 36 yeah 46 26 yeah yeah it is it is included in the road map down the yeah for the next Milestones I'm not sure. If in the Milestone 2 or Milestone three. But it is for sure included in in the road map okay. But the question is they are asking for collaboration. So they are already trying to build it. So yes by the way yes we are the title of our jobs is open source. So of course any collaboration is more than welcome please be sure to check out
our contributor guidelines, which is the usual stuff we have like mainstream things there and anybody who wants to contribute can contribute in fact we do have three external contributors right. Now so the more the merrier great and this is why it's great to have you guys on here. Because I was not able to answer, that question you you guys are the experts on, that okay let's see we have one question more from Matias what design considerations were made for the library considering classic Soroban and How Stellar classic assets work yeah I can maybe maybe partially give an answer and O you're going to to to add. If I miss anything yeah. So we are trying to navigate between like different
let's say requirements concerns and yeah of course one of the requirements is to to make things compatible with Stellar classic for the moment we have finished with with the fungible fungible token implementation, that is like in the, that was audited I demonstrated and actually it overlaps by with many of the features, that are available already from the Soroban sbone SDK itself. So on, that front we haven't done much. Because yeah most of the work was already done by the the Stellar Development Foundation team. So
yeah for the NFT, that we are for the NFT part modu, that we are working at right. Now yeah there there are some discussions about how how this compatibility can be brought on the table there are some ideas, that are circulating. But yeah trying to to accommodate also for existing Stellar developers, that are like try to leverage Stellar classic assets. But also for some other use cases where people need need some customizations, that can be brought only by smart contracts okay great let's see yeah and I was actually thinking about this mat was he was asking on what's on the the road map what what
is coming next can you maybe talk a little bit about the road map there will be smart wallets many other token standards some utilities like fix Point arithmetic and Merle proofs stuff like, that. But they are all discussed and we may change the order Etc depending on the community feedback and our priorities okay great yeah actually yeah we are really looking for like feedback what is what are the utilities the The Primitives, that are most the mostly like Builders from Stellar are like eager to see. So yeah we are definitely looking for for feedback so, that we can Shape Up together the our road
map okay great. So we have a question also from L again any highlights or low lights you can share about the Stellar sorond architecture compared to other blockchains since you have work with other chains you want me to start buan. And then you can continue okay. So authorization is done in a great way I will let poan speak more on, that. But but I also admire the way authorization and authentication Works in San my biggest admiration comes from the developer experience it's great right. Now it's super simple yet super safe and we also want to and try to do our best to keep this safety and simplicity in our projects I will L it to buan
yeah I'm also joining Al on on this front and yeah just to add, that like yeah authorizations how how they're handled like on a protocol level actually relieves a lot of pain points, that for example developers from coming from EVM chains are having like for dealing with authorizations actually many of the things, that are natively supported and Builders shouldn't care like at all in other ecosystems like it's additional overhead of like how to construct your contract. So they're not too big they're too complex and here like
Builders can focus on what's the most important the business logic, that is regarding their their specific application. So this is a huge benefit other thing, that comes to my mind is for example how how the how we deal with upgradability in in soron it's just a seamless like a a wine liner compared to for example Ethereum where are like dozens of different OB gradability patterns with different tradeoffs security concerns Etc and here is just a no-brainer. So it's bit a big thumbs up about the work, that that's done in the background. So yeah okay great
well, that was all very positive. So happy to hear, that I think Matias was asking about the soulbound tokens. If if, that's possible is, that something, that's been cons being considered or thought about or is, that not something, that's been been considered yet sorry it cut and I couldn't hear oh. So Matas was asking about Soul bound tokens. If that's soul to yeah actually it is not something, that is planned straight straight away. But but yeah I mean with the NFTs we are building the the ground for for for, that and yeah maybe yeah we have to to see how yeah how this is how
this can fit in the future Milestone okay great by the way it is worth to note, that we are building this for community so. If Community wants, that we will for sure do it it great have you identified the biggest pain points from a developer experience for building cross Chain Solutions this also a question from yes right. Now we haven't explored how we would do cross chain stuff for Stellar. So I for myself am not able to answer, that as of yet maybe in the upcoming months I will be. But maybe buan will have something to say I don't know yeah just to add, that there there is the AEL team, that are doing some yeah great great job on, that front so. If you are interested in Cross chain cross chain
standards don't remember the exact number of it. But U yeah you can check their their work yeah they have really good good stuff there yeah okay great any any other questions let's see I think we got H there's only one I skipped was what is the expected Cadence of releases for for the library yeah I answered, that right. Now in chat. But let me say it from here as well we are we will try to have a monthly release schedule the keyword here is trying. But we will do our best okay great let's see any any other questions I think we we got I think we got quite a few questions, that were outstanding from from from our
last session where we we were not really provide able to provide good answers I think we got got all of, that covered. So it it was really great to to have you both on on on this call and and I think I I'm super excited about what what this means for the developer experience on on on Stellar and I can't wait to see what people are building using using the open sein Library any any final words from your guys yeah just yeah thanks thanks a lot for for having us it was a pleasure for us also to thanks for all the questions and yeah don't hesitate to to Ping us on Discord Discord and yeah chat there about about whatever you you think yeah yeah it's it's important so, that we we
build a a great tools for the whole web system. So yeah thank you and in addition to, that please feel free to open up any issues for the features you want to say or bugs you want to report or just questions you want to ask we are also pretty active on GitHub and it's a public repository. So feel free to interact with us from GitHub as well great thank you so much for joining and maybe we will do a follow-up session at a later time this was great love the demo love to pick your brains on on these topics. So thank you again for joining and thank you for everyone who who listened in here thank you and see you next week bye by right thank you